Marketplace Literacy_Script-English
1-Introduction to Marketplace Literacy
Hello, everyone.
We have a number of lessons on marketplace literacy.
Marketplace literacy is about learning to be better customers or entrepreneurs and understanding the marketplaces around you.
Marketplace literacy is about understanding not only what to buy and sell, but also how and why.
What are some general things about the marketplace, buying and selling that everyone needs to understand?
What do you need to know as a consumer to make your money go further and get better quality products?
How can you start a business?
How can you use resources without waste and in a way that is good for the environment?
Marketplace literacy is about consumer literacy, entrepreneurial literacy, and sustainability literacy.
Our lessons will place you on a path to gain skills and knowledge as customers, entrepreneurs, buyers, and sellers.
They will help you gain self-confidence as a customer and entrepreneur.
The lessons will help you be more aware of your rights as a customer and entrepreneur.
So let's get started.
2-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Evolution of Needs
Hello everyone.
How did products evolve over time and why?
Take transportation for example.
We went from horse-drawn wagons to bicycles to cars and planes.
How did this happen and why?
We went from cooking with firewood to gas stoves.
How did this happen and why?
Is it money that led to these changes?
Is it technology?
Is it competition?
Yes,
It can be all these things.
Most importantly,
The changes led to products that serve customer needs better.
Find a product near you.
How do you think it has evolved over time and why?
How is the same need satisfied a thousand years ago?
Twenty years ago?
Is the same need satisfied better today than twenty years ago?
3-1-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Prioritizing Elements of a Business Clip-1
What is most important when starting a business?
When we think of a business many things come to mind
Suppliers, Manufacturers, producers Wholesalers, retailers, customers , Transportation and money
All of this is important,
But is there one thing that is most important is it money or capital?
To start a business we need money don't we?
Is it the producer or manufacturer as they make the product?
Is it the customer who pays and then uses the product?
Is it transportation to get the product to where it needs to be?
Is it the wholesaler or is it the shopkeeper who actually sells it?
Which one is most important?
Is there something that every business must have?
Why
3-2-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Prioritizing Elements of a Business Clip-2
What is most important when starting a business?
When we think of a business many things come to mind
Suppliers, Manufacturers, producers Wholesalers, retailers, customers , Transportation and money
All of this is important,
But is there one thing that is most important is it money or capital?
What about money?
Is it possible to start a business without money?
Money helps us with transactions, but there used to be a time when there was no money.
People exchanged goods without money, and some still do.
Money was created for exchanges between customers and businesses.
But is it possible to start a business without money?
Is there a service you could provide that does not need money up front?
How about something that involves teaching or repairing.
Maybe you can get products on credit and then resell them.
What are some ways to start a business without money?
Can you think of a few examples?
3-3-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Prioritizing Elements of a Business Clip-3
What is most important when starting a business?
When we think of a business many things come to mind
Suppliers, Manufacturers, producers Wholesalers, retailers, customers , Transportation and money
All of this is important,
But is there one thing that is most important?
Transportation is important when running a business, because products need to get to customers.
But is it possible to start a business without transportation?
Could you transport the product yourselves or produce it where you are?
What are some ways to do this?
Wholesalers buy goods in bulk and sell them in smaller quantities to retailers.
How would you start a business without wholesalers?
If you were a producer, could you sell directly to shops?
If you're a shopkeeper, could you buy directly from the producers?
What are some ways?
3-4-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Prioritizing Elements of a Business Clip-4
What is most important when starting a business?
When we think of a business many things come to mind
Suppliers, Manufacturers, producers Wholesalers, retailers, customers , Transportation and money
All of this is important,
But is there one thing that is most important?
Suppliers provide the material that a company uses to produce its products.
Could you start a business without a supplier?
By providing the materials yourselves?
What are the ways?
Shops provide customers with convenient access to a broad variety of products.
Could you start a business without a shop?
Could you deliver to customers at home without having a shop?
What are some ways?
Producers create goods and services.
Could you start a business without a producer?
Maybe by producing the goods and services yourself.
What are some ways?
Could we start a business without a customer?
3-5-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Prioritizing Elements of a Business Clip-5
What is most important when starting a business?
When we think of a business many things come to mind
Suppliers, Manufacturers, producers Wholesalers, retailers, customers , Transportation and money
All of this is important,
But is there one thing that is most important?
Customers use goods and services.
They pay money, which provides the income to businesses.
Is it possible to start a business without customers?
Would it work without the customer?
Who would use the product?
And who would pay the businesses for the product?
Where would the income come from?
It is possible to imagine a business without many things
But not without a customer.
4-1-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Physical and Psychological Needs Clip-1
Hello everyone.
Why do we go to the grocery store?
Why do we go to the doctor?
Why do we go to the movie theater?
Why do people like to wear nice clothes?
Why do we go to the mechanic?
Because we have needs as customers and human beings,
But are all needs the same.
For example, Food and beverages fill physical needs like hunger and thirst.
Watching a movie fills a psychological need to be entertained.
Think of some physical needs.
What are some products that satisfy each physical need?
Think of a few.
Think of some psychological needs.
What are some products that satisfy each psychological need?
Think of a few.
Is this a physical or psychological need?
It is a physical need.
What about this?
It is a psychological need.
What are some products that satisfy both physical and psychological needs?
For example, clothing protects us physically but also makes us feel good about ourselves.
Think of a few products that satisfy both needs.
4-2-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Physical and Psychological Needs Clip-2
Products can satisfy many physical and psychological needs.
There are different types of products.
For instance, a television is different from a visit to the doctor.
Here are some examples of products.
How is a television different from a visit to a doctor?
How is going to the movie theater different from an umbrella?
Products can be goods or services.
Goods are tangible products.
You can touch them and feel them.
Services are intangible, like travel.
Is this a good or a service?
Does it satisfy a physical need or a psychological need or both?
It is a good.
Is this a good or a service?
Does it satisfy a physical need or a psychological need or both?
It is a service.
Goods and services are two different types of products.
They meet different types of needs, physical and psychological needs.
Understanding types of needs and types of products helps us to be better customers and entrepreneurs.
5-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Types of Customers
Are all customers the same?
Can we sell everyone the same product?
Think of a product like food.
Does everyone have the same taste in food?
Does everyone use the same recipes?
What about clothing?
Does everybody wear the same clothing?
Do people have clothing needs based on their occupation?
Or, different tastes in what they like to wear?
Customers have unique preferences based on their lives and experiences.
Their preferences may be different because of a lot of reasons,
Like age, cultural background, and so on.
When you create a product, who are you creating it for?
Who would you like to sell it to?
Think of a group of customers.
For example, they could be young women living in cities.
Describe what makes them unique in their preference for your product.
How are they different?
How do they make decisions to buy your products?
Write out a few different steps they go through.
What do they want in your product?
Use your understanding to design the product.
Think of how best to communicate that to the customer group.
Think of how best to deliver that product to the customer.
Think of how to price the product for that customer.
Are there other groups of customers for your product?
Repeat the process.
To have a successful business, you need to design your product and price it and communicate it and deliver it based on your customer group's preferences.
6-Generic Marketplace Literacy - Value Chain
Value chain
How does a product get to us?
Consider milk something that is widely consumed
To produce milk cows should be taken care of, fed and milked
Do you get milk right there?
No
The milk needs to be collected and stored in containers
Next with sufficient amounts the containers need to be taken to places where the milk is processed and refrigerated
Next the milk needs to be transported to wholesalers
Next it is transported to retailers
Now you can buy milk from retail shops or you can have it delivered to your door
This entire sequence is called a value chain
Why is the word value used?
How is value changing from the cow to your doorstep and kitchen?
7-1-Consumer Literacy - What is Value Clip-1
Value chain
How does a product get to us?
Consider milk something that is widely consumed
To produce milk cows should be taken care of, fed and milked
Do you get milk right there?
No
The milk needs to be collected and stored in containers
Next with sufficient amounts the containers need to be taken to places where the milk is processed and refrigerated
Next the milk needs to be transported to wholesalers
Next it is transported to retailers
Now you can buy milk from retail shops or you can have it delivered to your door
This entire sequence is called a value chain
Why is the word value used?
How is value changing from the cow to your doorstep and kitchen?
7-2-Consumer Literacy - What is Value Clip-2
Value is what I give compared to what I get.
I give more than money.
I give time and effort.
I get more than the product.
I get trust and peace of mind.
Value in the exchange is all that I give compared to all that I get.
Value in an exchange is very important to understand.
You should always look for value in what you buy.
And you should consider all that you give and all that you get to understand value in an exchange.
8-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Unwrapping a Business
Think about a clothing business.
What is the product?
Why does it have what it has?
What benefit does it deliver?
How is it distributed?
How was it delivered to you?
How is it communicated to you?
How did you learn about it?
How much does it cost?
Think about a food business.
What is the product?
Why does it have what it has?
What benefit does it deliver?
How is it distributed?
How was it delivered to you?
How was it communicated to you?
How did you learn about it?
How much does it cost?
What are the costs and value to the customers?
Now, think of your business idea.
What have you learned about clothing and food as a customer that will help you with your product’s price, distribution, and communication?
9-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Business dos and donts
Hello everyone.
How should you run your business?
What are some things you should always do?
For example, you should always treat the customer with respect.
You should always be honest in your transactions.
Think about it.
What are some things you should always do in your business?
Make a list.
Now, what are some things you should never do?
You should never sell a product that you know is defective.
You should never cheat the customer.
Think about it.
What are some things you should never do in your business?
Make a list.
The things you should always do and the things you should never do are the code for how you run your business.
Your code tells your customers, suppliers, and others who you are as a business.
Your code will help you make decisions in a variety of situations.
Your code helps you build trust with your customers.
Develop a code for how you run your business.
10-1-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Choosing a Business Clip-1
Have you wondered why people choose a particular business?
Perhaps you have started one or are thinking of starting one.
What are some things to consider?
How should you go about the decision?
And why should you choose a particular business?
There are so many things to consider.
Can you run that business?
Do you have the knowledge and skills?
Will people buy what you sell?
Is there demand?
Is there too much competition?
Can you succeed?
So what are the most important things to consider in choosing a business?
Think about it.
10-2-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Choosing a Business Clip-2
Have you wondered why people choose a particular business?
Let's think about some possible businesses you can start.
What are you good at?
List some businesses you think you would be good at.
Go one by one.
Let me think with you.
For instance,
I think I would be good at repairing mobile phones.
I say that because I like technology and I have learned how to repair mobile phones in the past.
I also think I would be good at selling using the internet, so I can be a reseller of products that are sold on the internet.
Now it's your turn.
Identify your strengths and weaknesses as an entrepreneur.
How will you identify your possible business?
10-3-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Choosing a Business Clip-3
Have you wondered why people choose a particular business?
You may have thought of some businesses to start.
Your next task is to consider if each of these businesses have demand.
People like to eat bread and other baked goods.
There could be demand for a bakery business.
Do people need your product and are they willing to pay for it?
That is what we call demand.
People value things like baked foods.
Needing or wanting a loan is not enough.
People have to be willing to pay for product.
That's how you will have income in your business.
Consider a few needs.
Start with a longer list.
Analyze each one.
Do these needs have demand?
Are you able to offer the product based on your strengths and weaknesses?
10-4-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Choosing a Business Clip-4
Have you wondered why people choose a particular business?
Now consider the list of needs that you think you can fulfill with products.
Are these needs backed by willingness to pay?
In other words, is there demand for products satisfying these needs?
And what about your strengths and weaknesses in offering such products?
Next, we consider the competition.
Others' strengths and weaknesses to satisfy the same needs and address demand.
Think about the following questions.
How would your business compare to your competition?
For each need, list some competitors.
Are you the only business serving this need?
Or do you have competition?
What are the strengths and weaknesses of your competitors?
Can you satisfy the needs of the consumers better than your competitors?
How?
For instance, if your competition is a large company, maybe you can provide delivery and serve customers better because you know your community.
11-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Understanding Customers
Hello everyone.
Think about a product or service you bought for the first time.
What were the steps in your decision making process?
How did you become aware for your need of this product?
How did you become aware of different products to serve that need?
How did you learn more about the products?
How did you try out the products?
How did you select one to buy from different products?
Were you happy with your choice?
Based on the steps you took, think of the customer for your business.
How will you make them aware of your product?
How will you help them learn more about your product?
How will you help them try out the products?
How will you encourage them to select your product?
How will you try to have customers satisfied with your product?
Understanding customers is central to running a profitable business.
12-1-Entrepreneurial Literacy - How to learn about Customers and Markets Clip-1
Hello everyone.
To start a business,
how can you learn about your customers and markets?
What are some ways?
You can observe shops and customers to learn by seeing and hearing.
You can talk to people, customers, sellers, and suppliers to learn through conversation.
You can practice selling in someone's shop to learn by doing.
Gathering information in these different ways is important.
You need to gather information to understand what business you want to start.
Even after deciding what business to start, you need to continue to gather information as you run the business.
This information will help you run the business successfully.
For example, you need information to choose suppliers, to communicate with customers, to provide them with products, and to see if they are satisfied.
All of this information helps you run your business as well as you can.
12-2-Entrepreneurial Literacy - How to learn about Customers and Markets Clip-2
Hello everyone.
To start a business,
how can you learn about your customers and markets?
What are some ways?
To start and run a business successfully, you have to constantly gather information.
Gather information about each possible business idea.
Talk to different people as potential customers.
Is there a need or demand for that business?
Visit businesses that would be your competition.
What are their strengths and weaknesses compared to yours?
For each business idea, where will you get supplies?
For how much?
What are the steps in the value chain?
How will you make each step happen?
What are the steps the customer goes through to buy the product?
How will you communicate with the customer?
How much will you charge?
Identify the customer segment that you would target with your business idea and why.
What are their needs and how would your business satisfy them?
Make a list of people you could ask for advice about your business idea, Friends, family, competitors, potential customers, etc.
Make a list of competitors you would have for your business.
What are their strengths and weaknesses?
Consider price, models and designs, variety, customer service, timing, and any other factors relevant to the business and what they sell.
13-Entrepreneurial Literacy - What is Value for Customers
Hello everyone.
In a marketplace exchange, value is what you give and what you get.
When you sell a product, how do you create value for customers?
Is it the money the customers pay?
Is it the products the customers get?
Is it both?
Think of selling food or repairing a cell phone.
What does value mean for customers?
What do customers give?
They give money for the product.
They give their time gathering information, traveling to the store, and shopping.
All of this requires effort.
They also give you their trust.
So customers give more than just money.
What do they get?
They get the product.
Sometimes the product comes with a warranty.
They also get a shop or seller where they know they will get a good deal.
As a seller, you need to understand what value is for the customer.
What do they give and what do they get?
This is how you can create value for them and have a profitable business.
14-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Designing Products
Hello, everybody.
How should you design a product?
What should the ingredients be?
Let's say you are preparing a food product.
Should you put something into it because you like it, or because you feel like it, or because you have a supply of the ingredient?
Think about this when you are a customer and use a product.
What would you like to be in the product?
You don't look for ingredients as much as benefits from the product.
You don't consume a food because it has salt or pepper, but because the salt or pepper adds taste to it.
The ingredients lead to benefits for customers.
As the benefits add up, they increase the value of the product in an exchange.
Most important here is what customers look for in a product.
What are the benefits they seek in a product?
And how can you design it to deliver those benefits?
Think about the product you have in mind for your business.
How would you design it to meet your customers' needs?
Who is your target customer segment and what are their activities?
What ingredients or materials would you use?
What benefits will each of these lead to?
Write or draw it out. What features would your product have?
What benefits will each of these lead to?
What varieties of this product would you have?
15-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Communicating about Products
Hello everybody.
How should you communicate about your product and business?
What do you know about the customers for your business?
What type of people would buy your product?
What do you know about their lifestyles?
This information can tell you how to reach your customers through communications.
Think about the product you have in mind for your business.
Who are your customers?
Think of one customer group.
Identify the ways you would communicate
Think of the objective of the communication.
Why are you communicating?
Is it to make customers aware of your product?
Is it to have them learn about it in more detail?
Is it to get them to try the product?
Or is it to remind them to buy the product again?
Or is it some other reason?
What would you say in the communication?
How would you communicate?
For example, through flyers, by telling people, etc.
Repeat this for each customer group.
Communication is central to having a successful business as it informs the world about your product.
16-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Distribution
Why is it better to sell products close to where the customers live?
Why not just sell the products at the same place they are manufactured?
Let’s try to think about an example. Where is the closest place you could purchase a t-shirt that is your size?
Who do you think manufactured it and where?
How did it go from where it was made, to where you can buy it?
As an entrepreneur, how do you get all of the raw materials that you need?
Do you purchase the raw materials directly?
Supplies must travel from where they are made to you.
How is it possible that products manufactured so far away can be purchased so close to you?
Wherever a product is made, the seller must deliver the product to the customers.
This process is called distribution.
Distribution is the process of supplying goods to stores and other businesses that sell to customers.
What are the ways that the products are distributed?
Are all products delivered in the same way, and in the same quantity?
Do you know about any other types of distribution methods?
When a manufacturer delivers a product directly to the customers, this is called Direct distribution.
For example, someone who grows vegetables and sells them directly to their customer's doorsteps.
There are also other ways that you can distribute a good.
One option is to sell the product using a middle man.
You could also distribute your product to a wholesaler.
You could even distribute your product online using the internet.
Think about which distribution channel is most suitable for your business.
Let’s think about various types of distribution: distribution through a wholesaler, distribution through a retailer, distribution through a middleman, direct distribution, and online distribution.
There are many options, but it is important to choose the best option for your business.
When you purchase the raw materials you need, which distribution method is most convenient to you?
How do you get your materials?
Is it available in the quantity you need?
Is it safe and easy to get?
Think about these things as you decide on the best distribution methods for your customer segments.
How do you distribute your products?
Do you use a commissioned agent or a middleman?
Do you sell to a wholesaler?
Do you sell to a retailer?
Maybe you sell directly to your customers?
What about selling online?
When deciding which method is best for you, prioritize safety, convenience, and customer satisfaction.
The main goal is that you are fulfilling the customer's need.
This focus will hopefully lead to loyal customers and more business.
17-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Pricing
Hello everyone.
As an entrepreneur, one of the most important things to consider is the price of the product.
Think about the raw materials that you buy.
Who decides the prices of the products?
What determines the price of any given item?
Do you find the same price across all different shops?
How do these prices get determined?
Is there any price difference between the wholesale and retail shops?
Why?
Think about it..
Remember the value chain..how value gets added at each step.
Is it possible to buy products for the exact price that it took to manufacture?
What other expenses are factored into the price you pay?
What are things that could be added to the price?
For example.. let’s think about the clothing business,
Is the price of a shirt the exact cost it took to manufacture?
No – let’s think about expenses that are added into that cost.
The raw materials, stitching charges, packing expenses, distribution costs, transportation expenses, advertisement expenses, laborers expenses, government tax, rent, electricity charges,and seller profit.
When you are determining your prices, make sure you are considering all of the expenses.
For example, if you are a farmer, you have to consider the cost of the seeds, the fertilizers, composting, plowing the land, planting the seeds, pesticides, water expenses, dealing with weeds, harvesting expenses, packing expenses, transportation expenses, labourer expenses, the value of your effort.
You should consider all of your expenses when you set the price of your product.
Not only the money you spent, but the value of your time, effort, and expertise.
All of these should be considered in setting the price, right?
Should you consider anything else?
Think about it.
You have determined all the expenses you have.
Your price must cover these costs, or you won’t make a profit. But it’s not just about covering costs.
What about the customer?
How does the customer see the value..the give and the get?
How much is the customer willing to give in terms of money? effort? time? trust? Information?
What is the customer getting in return?
Imagine you’re shopping for a new pair of shoes.
What factors influence your decision?
Is it just about the quality or the brand?
What about the price?
Does a higher price mean better quality to you?
What price can you set to make the exchange of good value for the customer?
Can you afford the expenses and still make a profit?
Can you adjust the give? The get?
Can you find a balance where the business is profitable while providing value to the customer?
Setting a price involves understanding value.
Monetary price is one aspect of the give for the customer, a most important aspect.
Understand your costs.
And also understand how much the customer is willing to pay and for what.
You also need to understand the larger marketplace, and your competition and their prices.
Your goal is to price your product profitably while meeting customer expectations.
If it's too low, you may struggle to cover costs; if it's too high, you risk losing customers.
Pricing is not just about making a sale.
It’s about communicating your product’s value to your customers.
It's one of the first things customers notice.
It can influence their perception of your product and your brand.
Who are your customers?
What are their problems and needs?
What solutions do you offer?
What benefits are your customers getting from your product?
Will they feel better, save time, or enjoy convenience?
Pricing should reflect the value your product brings to their lives.
Is your customer looking for premium products, or are they more price-sensitive?
Consider their income, preferences, and the value they place on your product.
If your target customer is willing to pay more for premium features or an enhanced experience, then pricing higher may work.
If they prioritize cost, a lower price may be more appropriate
Who are your competitors?
What are they charging for similar products?
Your price communicates your product's positioning.
A higher price may suggest premium quality, exclusivity, or luxury.
A lower price could indicate value or affordability.
How does your pricing align with how you want customers to perceive your product.
18-Entrepreneurial Literacy - Accounting
What are some reasons to keep accounts?
How about running a household?
Why should you keep accounts…a budget?
It helps you to say within your means.
It helps make sure you don’t spend more than you have
It gives you information to run your household.
So why should a business maintain accounts.
It gives you information to see how your business is doing, and understand its profitability.
It gives you information you can use to grow the business.
It helps you to understand your financial situation and repay debts on time
Keeping good records helps maximize savings because you know where money is being spent
Just as you research to understand customers and the marketplace…
Keeping accounts helps you to understand your own business.
Learning about your past through accounting helps you to engage in financial planning about the future.
You can project income, cash flow, how much you need to sell to break even and so on.
So take the time to understand why you should do accounting of what has happened with your business in the past.
And use it for financial planning and to run and grow your business in the future.
The time and effort will pay off in many ways.
What you get will be worth what you give.
19-1-Sustainability Literacy
As a customer
Should you care about anything else other than product?
How about time, money, effort, convenience
Should you care about anything else?
Think about it!
What about
The environment?
The society?
But what has the environment got to do with what i buy?
Or the society?
What has the environment and society got to do with what I buy?
Are there examples of products that are better for the environment?
Such as organic vegetables? Or handcrafted products?
Think of a product that is good for the environment.
Is it products like hand carved wood?
So how does it help the environment?
Now think of a product that is good for society!
Chemical free shopping paper bags?
So how does this help people?
What about environmentally harmful products
Is it products like plastic cups?
How does it harm the environment or hurt it?
Think of a product that is harmful for the people!
Is it like carbonated soft drinks?
How does this hurt society?
What else other than the product do you think you should care about?
Think about it
19-2-Sustainability Literacy
As an entrepreneur
You serve the customer
And further your business
You should care about profit
And the customer
Should you care about anything else?
Think about it!
Why should I care about the environment?
Or the society?
What has the environment got to do with what i buy?
Or the society?
What has the environment and society got to do with what I sell?
Are there examples of products you can sell and businesses you can run that are better for the environment?
Think about it
How about a food business?
How does it help the environment or the society?
Are there examples of products you can sell and businesses you can run that are worse for the environment?
Think about it.
How about running a magazine shop?
How does it harm the environment or society?
Are there practices in the way you run the business better for the environment or for the society?
How about dairy farming?
How does it help the environment or society?
Are there practices in the way you run the business worse for the environment or for the society?
How about a pharmacy business?
How does it harm the environment or society?
Think about it.
19-3-Sustainability Literacy
Indeed other than the business and customers.
The third aspect is the environment and the society.
Why should you care about it as a customer?
Should you not care at all?
Or should you care because it is the responsible thing to do?
Or should you care about it to have a better future for your children?
What are you willing to give up for a more environmentally friendly product?
Would you pay more?
Would you buy a product that is less convenient?
Think about it!
19-4-Sustainability Literacy
Consider the environment.
Why should you care about it as an entrepreneur?
Should you not care at all?
Or should you care because it is the responsible thing to do?
Or should you care about it to have a better future for your children?
What are you willing to give up for a more environmentally friendly product?
Would you take a smaller profit?
Would you sell a product that is less convenient?
Are there other benefits to you?
What are they?
Establish trust with customers
Draw in new customers
Create customer loyalty
Save money
What other benefits are there?
Think about it!
19-5-Sustainability Literacy
Imagine a marketplace where every decision you make has an effect
Let us take a look
In being a customer
What are the trade-offs between
Product
And environment
What about the trade-offs between
Product
And society
Think about it
Now think about the synergies (win-wins) between
Product
And environment
And the synergies (win-wins) between
Product
And society
Think about it
In running your business
What are the trade-offs between
Profit
And environment
And the trade-offs between
Profit
And society
Think about it
Now what about the synergies (win-wins) between
Profit
And environment
And the synergies (win-wins) between
Profit
And society
Whether you're buying a product or running a business, your choices matter.
Think about it
19-6-Sustainability Literacy
In being a customer
What are some things you will ALWAYS do that address societal issues?
Like mehndi drawing
What are some things you will ALWAYS do as a customer that address environmental issues?
Like using paper shopping bags
Think about it
What are some things you will NEVER do as a customer that address societal issues?
Like inappropriate dress code
What are some things you will NEVER do as a customer that address environmental issues?
Like littering
Think about it
In running your business,
What are some things you will ALWAYS do as an entrepreneur that address that address societal issues?
Like providing cultural acceptable services.
What are some things you will ALWAYS do as an entrepreneur that address environmental issues?
Like selling reusable products.
Think about it
Now what are some things you will NEVER do as an entrepreneur that address societal issues?
Like selling bad goods to the society.
What are some things you will NEVER do as an entrepreneur that address environmental issues?
Like packaging in plastic bags.
Think about it
19-7-Sustainability Literacy
So what are the major issues affecting the environment today and in the future?
Here are a few
Climate change
Deforestation
Pollution
Land degradation
Overpopulation
How does being a customer or an entrepreneur affect these issues?
As a customer making consumer choices
Sustainable products
Transportation habits
Buying environmentally friendly products
Recycling
As entrepreneurs
Selling environmentally friendly products
Recycling products
Transportation
So what are the major issues affecting people today and in the future?
Here are a few
Refugees
Migrant workers
Sweatshop labor
Water & food insecurity
How does being a customer or an entrepreneur affect these issues?
As a customer
Socially responsible choices
Reduce food waste
As an entrepreneur
Treat employees well
Support for refugees
So when thinking of a customer and an entrepreneur
Think of a third element
Environment and society
19-8-Sustainability Literacy
As a customer in addition to the product, consider people and planet
Save water
Here are examples
Fix leaks
Use efficient appliances
Water plants wisely
How about energy?
How can we save energy
Here are examples
Use energy-efficient appliances
Turn off unused devices
How can we recycle products?
Here are examples
Separate waste
Buy recycled products
How can we reduce plastic use?
Here are examples
Use reusable bags
Buy in bulk
How about to supporting sustainable products?
Here is an example
Opt for eco-friendly products
Think about it.
19-9-Sustainability Literacy
As an entrepreneur, in addition to the customer and profit, consider people and planet?
How can we avoid plastic use?
Here are examples
Eco-friendly packaging
Reusable options
Now think of some more examples
How can we minimize transportation?
Here are examples
Local sourcing
Digital communications
Now think of some more examples
How can we use energy efficient practices?
Here are examples
Renewable energy
Install energy-efficient lighting
Now think of some more examples
How can you reduce waste?
Here are examples
Environmentally friendly packaging
Recycling
Now think of some more examples
As an entrepreneur, consider how you can think of people and planet in addition to the customer and profit.
20-1-Personal and Professional Aspirations
When thinking of a path to take
A business to run.. a vocation to pursue
What should I think about?
What does a person of that vocation do?
What does a nurse do?
What does an electronic technician do?
What does a vegetable shop owner do?
What else should I think about?
What does it take to be a nurse for example?
It takes sensitivity, it takes patience..
There are at least three ways of considering paths to take
What do I love to do … my passion
What I think I should do … my purpose
What am I good at … my proficiency
Passion, Purpose, Proficiency
Doing things I am good at but don’t love to do, may not be enjoyable
Doing things I love to but are not my purpose, may not be fulfilling
Doing things I think I should but am not good at, may not be sustainable
Think about value again
What do you give, what do you get
20-2-Personal and Professional Aspirations
Now let us think about the business you are considering
What should I think about?
Consider a beauty salon?
Is there demand?
What are my strengths? (Eg responsiveness to customers, flexibility)
What are my weaknesses? (Eg lack of experience, lack of capital)
What are the competitor’s strengths? (Eg Financial resources, reach)
What are the competitors weaknesses? (Lack of customer relationships)
Consider both personal and business reasons before choosing a path
Personally your passion, purpose, proficiency
What you give and what you get
Professionally
Demand
Your strengths and weaknesses
Competitors strengths and weaknesses?
Consider the give and get, between you and your customers?
20-3-Personal and Professional Aspirations
Value is what you give and what you get
Whether personal and professional
As a customer
What do you give…time…money…effort
What do you get…product…good experience
As an entrepreneur
What do you give…product..customer care
What do you get…revenue…satisfaction
What does the customer give … time
What does the customer get …product
As an employee
What do you give … effort
What do you get … salary
What does the employer give … opportunities
What does and employer get … revenue
At the personal level with your community
What do you give … support
What do you get … help in times of need
With your natural environment
What do you give … caring for your surroundings
What do you get … pleasant environment to live in
In your personal relationship
What do you give … trust and affection
What do you get … friends and family you can count on
Coming full circle, what are your aspirations in life
The paths you choose in life…vocation…business
What do you give … effort, time
What do you get … income, satisfaction
Exchanges and value occur not just in transactions, but at a deeper human level as well.
This is not to say everything is a transaction… quite the opposite
Think about your roles in life..the paths you have taken…the paths you are considering
What will you give what will you get…
So is that the best path for you?
